fix: separate public and internal types for all instrumentations (#1251)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js-contrib: GUIDELINES.md

# Instrumentations Implementation Guide

> This document captures general guidelines for implementing instrumentations in NodeJS and browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document captures general guidelines for implementing instrumentations.
```
I assume nothing would change for e.g. deno so why limiting?

Author: I was just thinking to clarify that these are not OpenTelemetry general guidelines, but specific guidelines we adopt in this (js) repo.
But if you think it's better without I'll remove it

## Types

### Public Types

> Public types are meant to be consumed by instrumentation users (OpenTelemetry distribution packages or end users implementing OpenTelemetry in their services). These are mostely instrumentation specific config interface (extending `InstrumentationConfig`) and the transitive types used in the config.

Reviewer: Should we mention somewhere that re-exporting (and therefore depending on) types from the instrumented library or it's `@types` package is not allowed/should be avoided?

Author: Yes, we should.
I wanted to keep this PR as short as possible and only address one thing.
After it is merged, I'll open follow-up PRs for other issues such as the one you mentioned.

#### File Name

These typescript `interface`s, `type`s, `enum`s and js `const`ants statements SHOULD be placed in a file named `types.ts`. This file SHOULD contain only public types that are needed for instrumentation users.

#### Exporting

All types from `types.ts` file MUST be exported from instrumentation `index.ts` using export statement `export * from './types'`, which guarentee that they publicly available.

#### Breaking Changes

Since these types are publicly exported, a breaking change in this file can cause transpilation issues or require code changes for existing users. Special care and attention should be put when modifiying this file to guarantee backword compatibility or proper documentation of breaking changes.

### Internal Types

> All types and constnats that instrumentation needs internally to implement the instrumentation logic. This can include extentions to instrumented package interfaces (for example - when adding data to existing objects), symbols for patches, enums etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All types and constants that instrumentation needs internally to implement the instrumentation logic. This can include extensions to instrumented package interfaces (for example - when adding data to existing objects), symbols for patches, enums etc.
```

> All types and constnats that instrumentation needs internally to implement the instrumentation logic. This can include extentions to instrumented package interfaces (for example - when adding data to existing objects), symbols for patches, enums etc.

Reviewer: Maybe add that these types must not be exported

#### File Name

> It is sometimes convinent to place these declrations in a dedicated file which can then be imported from various insturmentation files such as `instrumentation.ts`, `utils.ts` or test files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is sometimes convenient to place these declarations in a dedicated file which can then be imported from various instrumentation files such as `instrumentation.ts`, `utils.ts` or test files.
```

The file SHOULD be named `internal-types.ts`.

Using this file is optional - when a type is used only in a single file, it is ok to declare it and use it in this file **without exporting it**. When a type is expected to be shared between multiple files, it is encourged to be declared in `internal-types.ts` to prevent circular dependencies.

#### Exporting

This file MUST NOT be exported publicly from instrumentation package, not directly (via `index.ts`) and not transitivly via export of other files.

#### Breaking Changes

> Since the declarations in this file are not exported in the public instrumentation api, it is allowed to apply any breaking change refactors to this file.

Reviewer: It's a bit confusing the name something "breaking changes" but actually it's not breaking at all because it's an internal implementation detail.

Author: I updated the text, can you please look again? 👍
